The idea of a web application is that it is a program running on a remote server. A server refers to a computer system running continuously to “serve” the clients. In this case, the server will run a specific type of program that can be accessed by web browsers.

database is used to store information in an organized way

Identification and Authentication Failure
Identification refers to the ability to identify a user uniquely. In contrast, authentication refers to the ability to prove that the user is whom they claim to be. The online shop must confirm the user’s identity and authenticate them before they can use the system. However, this step is prone to different types of weaknesses. Example weaknesses include:

Allowing the attacker to use brute force, i.e., try many passwords, usually using automated tools, to find valid login credentials.
Allowing the user to choose a weak password. A weak password is usually easy to guess.
Storing the users’ passwords in plain text. If the attacker manages to read the file containing the passwords, we don’t want them to be able to learn the stored password.
Database table with usernames and passwords in cleartext

Broken Access Control
Access control ensures that each user can only access files (documents, images, etc.) related to their role or work. For example, you don’t want someone in the marketing department to access (read) the finance department’s documents. Example vulnerabilities related to access control include:

Failing to apply the principle of the least privilege and giving users more access permissions than they need. For example, an online customer should be able to view the prices of the items, but they should not be able to change them.
Being able to view or modify someone else’s account by using its unique identifier. For example, you don’t want one bank client to be able to view the transactions of another client.
Being able to browse pages that require authentication (logging in) as an unauthenticated user. For example, we cannot let anyone view the webmail before logging in.
Injection
An injection attack refers to a vulnerability in the web application where the user can insert malicious code as part of their input. One cause of this vulnerability is the lack of proper validation and sanitization of the user’s input.

Cryptographic Failures
This category refers to the failures related to cryptography. Cryptography focuses on the processes of encryption and decryption of data. Encryption scrambles cleartext into ciphertext, which should be gibberish to anyone who does not have the secret key to decrypt it. In other words, encryption ensures that no one can read the data without knowing the secret key. Decryption converts the ciphertext back into the original cleartext using the secret key. Examples of cryptographic failures include:

Sending sensitive data in clear text, for example, using HTTP instead of HTTPS. HTTP is the protocol used to access the web, while HTTPS is the secure version of HTTP. Others can read everything you send over HTTP, but not HTTPS.
Relying on a weak cryptographic algorithm. One old cryptographic algorithm is to shift each letter by one. For instance, “TRY HACK ME” becomes “USZ IBDL NF.” This cryptographic algorithm is trivial to break.
Using default or weak keys for cryptographic functions. It won’t be challenging to break the encryption that used 1234 as the secret key.
This figure shows a customer using her credit card online and the credit card number is sent in cleartext.

Don’t worry if these techniques look challenging or sophisticated at first. TryHackMe has dedicated in-depth rooms to help you understand and experiment with the various attacks against web applications.
