As a digital forensics investigator, you arrive at a scene similar to the one shown in the image above. What should you do as a digital forensics investigator? After getting the proper legal authorization, the basic plan goes as follows:

Acquire the evidence: Collect the digital devices such as laptops, storage devices, and digital cameras. (Note that laptops and computers require special handling if they are turned on; however, this is outside the scope of this room.)
Establish a chain of custody: Fill out the related form appropriately (Sample form). The purpose is to ensure that only the authorized investigators had access to the evidence and no one could have tampered with it.
Place the evidence in a secure container: You want to ensure that the evidence does not get damaged. In the case of smartphones, you want to ensure that they cannot access the network, so they don’t get wiped remotely.
Transport the evidence to your digital forensics lab.
At the lab, the process goes as follows:

Retrieve the digital evidence from the secure container.
Create a forensic copy of the evidence: The forensic copy requires advanced software to avoid modifying the original data.
Return the digital evidence to the secure container: You will be working on the copy. If you damage the copy, you can always create a new one.
Start processing the copy on your forensics workstation.
The above steps have been adapted from Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations, 6th Edition.

More generally, according to the former director of the Defense Computer Forensics Laboratory, Ken Zatyko, digital forensics includes:

Proper search authority: Investigators cannot commence without the proper legal authority.
Chain of custody: This is necessary to keep track of who was holding the evidence at any time.
Validation with mathematics: Using a special kind of mathematical function, called a hash function, we can confirm that a file has not been modified.
Use of validated tools: The tools used in digital forensics should be validated to ensure that they work correctly. For example, if you are creating an image of a disk, you want to ensure that the forensic image is identical to the data on the disk.
Repeatability: The findings of digital forensics can be reproduced as long as the proper skills and tools are available.
Reporting: The digital forensics investigation is concluded with a report that shows the evidence related to the case that was discovered.
