Networks are simply things connected. For example, your friendship circle: you are all connected because of similar interests, hobbies, skills and sorts.

Networks can be found in all walks of life:

A city's public transportation system
Infrastructure such as the national power grid for electricity
Meeting and greeting your neighbours
Postal systems for sending letters and parcels
But more specifically, in computing, networking is the same idea, just dispersed to technological devices. Take your phone as an example; the reason that you have it is to access things. We'll cover how these devices communicate with each other and the rules that follow.

In computing, a network can be formed by anywhere from 2 devices to billions. These devices include everything from your laptop and phone to security cameras, traffic lights and even farming!

Networks are integrated into our everyday life. Be it gathering data for the weather, delivering electricity to homes or even determining who has the right of way at a road. Because networks are so embedded in the modern-day, networking is an essential concept to grasp in cybersecurity.

Take the diagram below as an example, Alice, Bob and Jim have formed their network! We'll come onto this a bit later on.

Networks come in all shapes and sizes, which is something that we will also come on to discuss throughout this module.

Answer the questions below
What is the key term for devices that are connected together?

To communicate and maintain order, devices must be both identifying and identifiable on a network. What use is it if you don't know whom you're talking to at the end of the day?

Devices on a network are very similar to humans in the fact that we have two ways of being identified:

Our Name
Our Fingerprints
Now we can change our name through deed poll, but we can't, however, change our fingerprints. Every human has an individual set of fingerprints which means that even if they change their name, there is still an identity behind it. Devices have the same thing: two means of identification, with one being permeable. These are:

An IP Address
A Media Access Control (MAC) Address -- think of this as being similar to a serial number.

IP Addresses
Briefly, an IP address (or Internet Protocol) address can be used as a way of identifying a host on a network for a period of time, where that IP address can then be associated with another device without the IP address changing. First, let's split up precisely what an IP address is in the diagram below:

An IP address is a set of numbers that are divided into four octets. The value of each octet will summarise to be the IP address of the device on the network. This number is calculated through a technique known as IP addressing & subnetting, but that is for another day. What's important to understand here is that IP addresses can change from device to device but cannot be active simultaneously more than once within the same network.

IP Addresses follow a set of standards known as protocols. These protocols are the backbone of networking and force many devices to communicate in the same language, which is something that we'll come onto another time. However, we should recall that devices can be on both a private and public network. Depending on where they are will determine what type of IP address they have: a public or private IP address.

A public address is used to identify the device on the Internet, whereas a private address is used to identify a device amongst other devices. Take the table & screenshot below as an example. Here we have two devices on a private network:

These two devices will be able to use their private IP addresses to communicate with each other. However, any data sent to the Internet from either of these devices will be identified by the same public IP address. Public IP addresses are given by your Internet Service Provider (or ISP) at a monthly fee (your bill!)

https://assets.tryhackme.com/additional/cmn-aoc2020/day-8/2.png

As more and more devices become connected, it is becoming increasingly harder to get a public address that isn't already in use. For example, Cisco, an industry giant in the world of networking, estimated that there would be approximately 50 billion devices connected on the Internet by the end of 2021. (Cisco., 2021). Enter IP address versions. So far, we have only discussed one version of the Internet Protocol addressing scheme known as IPv4, which uses a numbering system of 2^32 IP addresses (4.29 billion) -- so you can see why there is such a shortage!

IPv6 is a new iteration of the Internet Protocol addressing scheme to help tackle this issue. Although it is seemingly more daunting, it boasts a few benefits:

Supports up to 2^128 of IP addresses (340 trillion-plus), resolving the issues faced with IPv4
More efficient due to new methodologies
The screenshot below compares both an IPv6 and IPv4 address.
