Networks are simply things connected. For example, your friendship circle: you are all connected because of similar interests, hobbies, skills and sorts.

Networks can be found in all walks of life:

A city's public transportation system
Infrastructure such as the national power grid for electricity
Meeting and greeting your neighbours
Postal systems for sending letters and parcels
But more specifically, in computing, networking is the same idea, just dispersed to technological devices. Take your phone as an example; the reason that you have it is to access things. We'll cover how these devices communicate with each other and the rules that follow.

In computing, a network can be formed by anywhere from 2 devices to billions. These devices include everything from your laptop and phone to security cameras, traffic lights and even farming!

Networks are integrated into our everyday life. Be it gathering data for the weather, delivering electricity to homes or even determining who has the right of way at a road. Because networks are so embedded in the modern-day, networking is an essential concept to grasp in cybersecurity.

Take the diagram below as an example, Alice, Bob and Jim have formed their network! We'll come onto this a bit later on.

Networks come in all shapes and sizes, which is something that we will also come on to discuss throughout this module.

Answer the questions below
What is the key term for devices that are connected together?

To communicate and maintain order, devices must be both identifying and identifiable on a network. What use is it if you don't know whom you're talking to at the end of the day?

Devices on a network are very similar to humans in the fact that we have two ways of being identified:

Our Name
Our Fingerprints
Now we can change our name through deed poll, but we can't, however, change our fingerprints. Every human has an individual set of fingerprints which means that even if they change their name, there is still an identity behind it. Devices have the same thing: two means of identification, with one being permeable. These are:

An IP Address
A Media Access Control (MAC) Address -- think of this as being similar to a serial number.

IP Addresses
Briefly, an IP address (or Internet Protocol) address can be used as a way of identifying a host on a network for a period of time, where that IP address can then be associated with another device without the IP address changing. First, let's split up precisely what an IP address is in the diagram below:

An IP address is a set of numbers that are divided into four octets. The value of each octet will summarise to be the IP address of the device on the network. This number is calculated through a technique known as IP addressing & subnetting, but that is for another day. What's important to understand here is that IP addresses can change from device to device but cannot be active simultaneously more than once within the same network.

IP Addresses follow a set of standards known as protocols. These protocols are the backbone of networking and force many devices to communicate in the same language, which is something that we'll come onto another time. However, we should recall that devices can be on both a private and public network. Depending on where they are will determine what type of IP address they have: a public or private IP address.

A public address is used to identify the device on the Internet, whereas a private address is used to identify a device amongst other devices. Take the table & screenshot below as an example. Here we have two devices on a private network:
