Authentication vulnerabilities
Conceptually, authentication vulnerabilities are easy to understand. However, they are usually critical because of the clear relationship between authentication and security.

Authentication vulnerabilities can allow attackers to gain access to sensitive data and functionality. They also expose additional attack surface for further exploits. For this reason, it's important to learn how to identify and exploit authentication vulnerabilities, and how to bypass common protection measures.

In this section, we explain:

The most common authentication mechanisms used by websites.
Potential vulnerabilities in these mechanisms.
Inherent vulnerabilities in different authentication mechanisms.
Typical vulnerabilities that are introduced by their improper implementation.
How you can make your own authentication mechanisms as robust as possible.

What is the difference between authentication and authorization?
Authentication is the process of verifying that a user is who they claim to be. Authorization involves verifying whether a user is allowed to do something.

For example, authentication determines whether someone attempting to access a website with the username Carlos123 really is the same person who created the account.

Once Carlos123 is authenticated, their permissions determine what they are authorized to do. For example, they may be authorized to access personal information about other users, or perform actions such as deleting another user's account.

Brute-forcing usernames
Usernames are especially easy to guess if they conform to a recognizable pattern, such as an email address. For example, it is very common to see business logins in the format firstname.lastname@somecompany.com. However, even if there is no obvious pattern, sometimes even high-privileged accounts are created using predictable usernames, such as admin or administrator.

During auditing, check whether the website discloses potential usernames publicly. For example, are you able to access user profiles without logging in? Even if the actual content of the profiles is hidden, the name used in the profile is sometimes the same as the login username. You should also check HTTP responses to see if any email addresses are disclosed. Occasionally, responses contain email addresses of high-privileged users, such as administrators or IT support.
